✅ What is a Priority Queue?
A Priority Queue is an abstract data structure similar to a regular queue, but each element is associated with a priority.
 Elements are served based on their priority, not just the order they arrive.

A higher priority element is served before a lower priority one.

If two elements have the same priority, they are served according to their insertion order (depending on implementation).

✅ How Is It Implemented?
Most commonly implemented using a heap (binary heap):

Min-Heap → the smallest element is on top

Max-Heap → the largest element is on top

In Java, it’s implemented via:
PriorityQueue<Integer> minHeap = new PriorityQueue<>(); // min-heap by default
PriorityQueue<Integer> maxHeap = new PriorityQueue<>(Collections.reverseOrder()); // max-heap

✅ Operations in a Priority Queue

Operation	Description	Time Complexity
insert(x)	Adds an element	O(log n)
peek()	Returns element with highest priority	O(1)
poll()	Removes and returns top element	O(log n)

Applications in Algorithm Design
Priority queues are widely used in greedy algorithms, graph algorithms, heap problems, and real-time scheduling:
🔹 1. Dijkstra's Algorithm
Use a min-heap to efficiently fetch the next closest node.

Helps in finding the shortest path in weighted graphs.

🔹 2. Prim's Algorithm
Use a min-heap to build a Minimum Spanning Tree (MST).

🔹 3. A* and Best-First Search
Use a priority queue to explore nodes with the least estimated cost first.

🔹 4. Top K Problems
Example: Find top K frequent elements or K largest/smallest numbers.

Use a min-heap of size K to keep track of top elements efficiently.

🔹 5. Huffman Coding
Build an optimal prefix code using a min-heap to combine least frequent characters.

🔹 6. Job Scheduling & Load Balancing
Priority queue helps assign resources to the highest priority job/task.

🔹 7. Merging K Sorted Lists/Arrays
Use a priority queue to efficiently track the smallest current element from K lists.